---
layout: post
title: phpspec
tags:
    - introducing library
    - phpspec
    - reference
---

> **Reference**: This article is intended to be as complete as possible and is kept up to date.

[phpspec](http://www.phpspec.net) is a highly opinionated unit test framework:
it was conceived to practice [specBDD](http://dannorth.net/introducing-bdd/)
(test method names should be sentences) and
[Mockist TDD](http://martinfowler.com/articles/mocksArentStubs.html)
(collaborators should always be mocked) and tries to enforce some testing practices
(see [Marcello Duarte](https://twitter.com/_md)'s [top 10 favourite phpspec limitations](http://techportal.inviqa.com/2014/09/11/my-top-ten-favourite-phpspec-limitations/)).

The [first version](http://blog.astrumfutura.com/2008/01/the-phpspec-zend-framework-app-testing-manifesto-zf-integration/)
was created by [Pádraic Brady](https://twitter.com/padraicb) as a port of [rspec](http://rspec.info/),
but Marcello Duarte and [Konstantin Kudryashov](https://twitter.com/everzet)
took over and released a second version which added code generation.
[Ciaran McNulty](https://twitter.com/CiaranMcNulty) then took the lead from v2.1
and added many features like collaborator generation, better exception specification
and currently for version 2.3 better constructor specification.

## Usage example

Let's have a look at how phpspec works. For this we'll need to have a project configured with
[Composer](https://getcomposer.org/download). Here's the `composer.json` file:

```
{
    "name": "vendor/project",
    "autoload": {
        "psr-4": {
            "Vendor\\Project\\": "src/Vendor/Project"
        }
    },
    "require": {},
    "require-dev": {}
}
```

We can install phpspec with the following:

    composer require --dev phpspec/phpspec:^2.2

Let's say we want to create a class that edits text files. We can call this class
`TextEditor`:

    phpspec describe 'Vendor\Project\TextEditor'

> **Tip**: make your vendor's binaries available by adding `vendor/bin` to your `$PATH`.
> `export PATH="vendor/bin:$PATH"`.

We should now have the `spec/Vendor/Project/TextEditorSpec.php` file, bootstraped
for us by phpspec:

```php
<?php

namespace spec\Vendor\Project;

use PhpSpec\ObjectBehavior;
use Prophecy\Argument;

class TextEditorSpec extends ObjectBehavior
{
    function it_is_initializable()
    {
        $this->shouldHaveType('Vendor\Project\TextEditor');
    }
}
```

> **Note**: this test can only be used to test the `TextEditor` class.

Our first use case will be about creating a file if it doesn't already exist.
Those are filesystem operations, so we decide to delegate the actual logic to a
`Filesystem` class (we'll create it later).

So our first step will be to create a set up method (it will be executed before
every test method) that initializes our object:

```php
<?php
// File: spec/Vendor/Project/TextEditorSpec.php

namespace spec\Vendor\Project;

use Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem;
use PhpSpec\ObjectBehavior;

class TextEditorSpec extends ObjectBehavior
{
    function let(Filesystem $filesystem)
    {
        $this->beConstructedWith($filesystem);
    }
}
```

Arguments passed to test methods are actually test doubles (phpspec uses the typehint
to know what to mock).

Now we can create the actual test method:

```php
<?php
// File: spec/Vendor/Project/TextEditorSpec.php

namespace spec\Vendor\Project;

use Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem;
use Vendor\Project\File;
use PhpSpec\ObjectBehavior;

class TextEditorSpec extends ObjectBehavior
{
    const FILENAME = '/tmp/file.txt';
    const FORCE_FILE_CREATION = true;

    function let(Filesystem $filesystem)
    {
        $this->beConstructedWith($filesystem);
    }

    function it_can_force_file_creation_if_it_does_not_already_exists(File $file, Filesystem $filesystem)
    {
        $filesystem->exists(self::FILENAME)->willReturn(false);
        $filesystem->create(self::FILENAME)->willReturn($file);

        $this->open(self::FILENAME, self::FORCE_FILE_CREATION)->shouldBe($file);
    }
}
```

This is roughly the equivalent of the following with [PHPUnit](https://phpunit.de/):

```php
<?php

namespace Vendor\Project\Tests;

use Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem;
use Vendor\Project\File;
use PhpSpec\ObjectBehavior;

class TextEditorTest extends PHPUnit_Framewor_TestCase
{
    const FILENAME = '/tmp/file.txt';
    const FORCE_FILE_CREATION = true;

    private $prophet;
    private $filesystem;
    private $textEditor;

    protected function setUp()
    {
        $this->prophet = new \Prophecy\Prophet();
        $this->filesystem = $this->prophet->prophesize('Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem');
        $this->textEditor = new TextEditor($filesystem->reveal());
    }

    protected function tearDown()
    {
        $this->prophet->checkPredictions();
    }

    /**
     * @test
     */
    public function it_can_force_file_creation_if_it_does_not_already_exists()
    {
        $file = $this->prophet->prophesize('Vendor\Project\File');
        $this->filesystem->exists(self::FILENAME)->willReturn(false);
        $this->filesystem->create(self::FILENAME)->willReturn($file);

        self::assertSame($file, $this->textEditor->open(self::FILENAME, self::FORCE_FILE_CREATION));
    }
}
```

> **Note**: We tried to make the test method as descriptive as possible (e.g. not `testOpen()`).
> This is the whole point of specBDD (specification Behavior Driven Development).

phpspec uses the mocking library prophecy (also available in PHPUnit since version 4.4),
which tries to be as less verbose as possible: to describe interractions, test doubles
can almost be used as the actual object, except we need to add a `->willreturn()` or
`->shouldBeCalled()` call afterwards.

> **Note**: By mocking all collaborators, we are forced to think how our object interracts with them.
> This is the whole point of Mockist TDD (Mockist Test Driven Development).

Now that we have a test, we are going to execute the test suite (as advocated by TDD):

    phpspec run

It will ask the following 7 questions:

1. Would you like me to generate an interface `Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem` for you?
2. Would you like me to generate an interface `Vendor\Project\File` for you?
3. Would you like me to generate a method signature `Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem::exists()` for you?
4. Would you like me to generate a method signature `Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem::create()` for you?
5. Do you want me to create `Vendor\Project\TextEditor` for you?
6. Do you want me to create `Vendor\Project\TextEditor::__construct()` for you?
7. Do you want me to create `Vendor\Project\TextEditor::open()` for you?

By accepting everytime, phpspec will bootstrap the following
`src/Vendor/Project/Vendor/TextEditor.php` file:

```php
<?php

namespace Vendor\Project;

class TextEditor
{

    public function __construct($argument1)
    {
        // TODO: write logic here
    }

    public function open($argument1, $argument2)
    {
        // TODO: write logic here
    }
}
```

In our specification, we make use of non existing class (`File` and `Filesystem`)
but phpspec also bootstraped them for us, for example `src/Vendor/Project/Vendor/Filesystem.php`:

```php
<?php

namespace Vendor\Project\Service;

interface Filesystem
{

    public function exists($argument1);

    public function create($argument1);
}
```

This is extremely usefull to kickstart our TDD cycle!

Once the code is written, we'll execute the test suite again, and then we'll add more
use cases to the test class (e.g. what happens if the file already exists?).

For further usage example, have a look at: [articles tagged with phpspec](tags/phpspec).

## SpecGen

phpspec's code generator is a big part of its value, but it could do more for us.
Hence the [SpecGen](https://github.com/memio/spec-gen) extension!

We can install it as follow:

```
composer require --dev memio/spec-gen:^0.4
echo 'extensions:' > phpspec.yml
echo '  - Memio\SpecGen\MemioSpecGenExtension' >> phpspec.yml
```

If we remove the code generated by phpspec:

```
rm src/Vendor/Project/TextEditor.php
```

And re-run the tests:

```
phpspec run
```

Then the generated class will be:

```php
<?php

namespace Vendor\Project;

use Vendor\Project\Service\Filesystem;

class TextEditor
{
    private $filesystem;

    public function __construct(Filesystem $filesystem)
    {
        $this->filesystem = $filesystem;
    }

    public function open($argument1, $argument2)
    {
    }
}
```

## Emergent Design

Test are more than simple regression checks: when a class is hard to test it indicates
that it does too many things or is too coupled.

They can also be used as a design tool: in our test method we can define exactly how
we would like to use the future object. We can even decide on the go that some logic
could be done by collaborators that don't exist yet and start defining how we like to
interract with them.

This is what Emergent Design is all about: the design emerges on the go from the tests.
Then they stop being simple tests, they become specifications: a live documentation
of your code, which never become out of date.

## Tips

Here are some personal tips:

* use `willReturn` if you need the returned value of a collaborator (official name: Mock)
* use `shouldBeCalled` to check that a collaborator is called (official name: Stub)
* do not chain `willReturn` and `shouldBeCalled`, you have to pick one!
* create a `it_is_a_` test method with a `shouldImplement` check when testing implementations
* the `shouldBe` matcher is usually the only one you need
* if you have a lot (how many? that's your call) of test methods, maybe it's time to split your object
* if you copy paste the same block of code in many test methods, maybe it's time extract it into an object

If the tested object (official name: System Under Test, SUT) creates a value object and passes
it to a collaborator you have two choices:

* pass `Argument::type('MyValueObject')`
* create a factory and add it as a dependency

## Conclusion

phpspec is a nice unit testing framework, with many advantages:

* it's fast: on average projects the test suite is run in less than a second
* it's a good pair-programming partner: when something is hard to test, it means that there is a better diffrent way to do it
* it's a time saver: the code bootstrapping feature is a must have!
* it isn't verbose: tests can be read as documented code examples

Give it a try!
