---
layout: post
title: Scuplin
tags:
    - introducing tool
---

Previously using [Carew](http://carew.github.io/), the static website generator,
this blog has now been migrated to [Sculpin](http://sculpin.io).

Both tools are really similar:

* they've been written in PHP
* they use both [Symfony](http://symfony.com) components and [Twig](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/)
* they both generate HTML pages from markdown documents

However Sculpin has a better support and its author is a member PHP FIG. Let's
see how it works

## Github Pages

Github provides a service allowing people to host static webistes: [Pages](https://pages.github.com/).
The idea is simple:

1. create a reporitory with a name following this pattern: `<username>.github.io`
2. commit HTML files at its root and push
3. ???
4. profit

We can create a `_sculpin` directory at the root of the project, install inside
it our Sculpin application with the page sources and finally generate the HTML
files back in the root directory.

## Installation

Installing Scuplin is very easy as a PHAR is provided:

    curl -O https://download.sculpin.io/sculpin.phar
    php sculpin.phar install
    php sculpin.phar generate --watch --server

The `generate` command will convert all markdown files into HTML and the `--server`
option will launch a local web server alowing us to preview the website in the browser.

## Writing articles

Articles are written in the `source/_posts` directory and their name must be
preffixed with their publication date (e.g. `2016-01-25-my-article.md`).

Every page starts with a front matters:

```
---
layout: post
title: My Article
tags:
    - essay
---
```

The rest of the file is in standard markdown and will constitute the content of
the page.

## Publishing

Once happy with the changes, we can generate the final HTML:

    php sculpin.phar generate --env=prod

The files will be located in `output_prod`. If we want to use Github Pages as
described above, we simply need to move those files to the root directory:

    cp -r output_prod/* ../

Then we simply need to commit all the changes and push.

## Conclusion

Sculpin is quite simple to use: write some markdown files and let it generate HTML
files out of it. It uses Symfony and Twig behind the scene making it really easy
to extend.

> **Note**: Migrating from carew has been a simple task. In my case it required:
>
> * removing all `link` function usage and use instead markdown links
> * configure `permalink` to `:year/:month/:day/:filename.html` in `app/config/sculpin_kernel.yml` to keep URL backward compatibility
